.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt SPACECOOKIE 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm spacecookie
.Nd gopher server daemon
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl -version
.Ar config.json
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a simple to use gopher daemon for serving static files.
It is either invoked with the
.Fl -version
flag to print its version or with the path to its config file
as the single argument.
The minimal config file needs to tell
.Nm
about the directory to serve and the server's name, i. e. the hostname
or IP address the server is reachable through.
All configuration options, the format and default values are explained in
.Xr spacecookie.json 5 .
.Pp
On startup,
.Nm
will check if it has been started with systemd socket activation.
If that's true, it will use the socket passed from systemd, if not,
it will setup the socket itself.
After that it will call
.Xr setuid 2
to switch to a less privileged user if configured to do so and start
accepting incoming gopher requests on the socket.
Note that using socket activation eliminates the need for starting
as a privileged user in the first place because systemd will take
care of the socket.
The systemd integration is explained in more detail in its own section.
.Pp
.Nm
will not fork itself to the background or otherwise daemonize
which can, however, be achieved using a supervisor.
Logs are always written to
.Sy stderr
and can be collected and rotated by another daemon or tool if desired.
.Pp
Incoming requests are filtered: No files or directories outside
the served directory or that start with a dot may be accessed by clients.
Allowed files are returned to clients unfiltered. For directories,
.Nm
checks if they contain a
.Ql .gophermap
file: If they contain one, it is used to generate the directory response,
otherwise one is generated automatically which involves guessing all file
types from file extensions.
The default file type is
.Ql 0 ,
text file.
The file format of the
.Ql gophermap
files and its use are explained in
.Xr spacecookie-gophermap 5 .
.Sh SYSTEMD INTEGRATION
.Nm
optionally supports two systemd-specific features:
It acts as a
.Sy notify
type service and supports socket activation.
.Pp
If you are writing a
.Xr systemd.service 5
file, be sure to use the
.Ql Type=notify
directive which allows
.Nm
to tell systemd when it has finished starting up and
when it is stopping before actually exiting.
.Pp
For socket activation, create a
.Xr systemd.socket 5
file that starts the
.Nm
service.
This has several advantages: For one, it allows starting
.Nm
on demand only and reducing the load on server startup.
Additionally it means that the daemon doesn't ever need
to be started as root because it won't need to setup a
socket bound to a well-known port.
.Pp
Mind the following points when configuring socket activation:
.Bl -bullet
.It
The port set in the
.Xr systemd.socket 5
file must match the port configured in
.Xr spacecookie.json 5 .
.It
The socket set up by
.Xr systemd 1
must use the IPv6 address family and the TCP protocol.
It is recommended to always set
.Ql BindIPv6Only=both
in
.Xr systemd.socket 5 .
To listen on an IPv4 address only, you can use an IPv6 socket
with a mapped IPv4 address.
.It
As always the
.Sy hostname
setting must match the public address or hostname the socket is listening on.
.El
.Pp
Make sure to check your socket configuration settings carefully since
.Nm
doesn't run any sanity checks on the socket received from
.Xr systemd 1
yet.
.Pp
An example
.Xr systemd.service 5
and
.Xr systemd.socket 5
file are provided in the
.Nm
source distribution in the
.Ql etc
directory.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr spacecookie.json 5 ,
.Xr spacecookie-gophermap 5 ,
.Xr systemd.service 5
and
.Xr systemd.socket 5 .
.Pp
For writing custom gopher application using the spacecookie library refer to the
.Lk https://hackage.haskell.org/package/spacecookie API documentation .
.Sh STANDARDS
By default,
.Nm
always behaves like a gopher server as described in
.Lk https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc1436 RFC1436 .
However users can configure
.Nm
to utilize common protocol extensions like the
.Ql h
and
.Ql i
types and
.Lk http://gopher.quux.org:70/Archives/Mailing%20Lists/gopher/gopher.2002-02%7C/MBOX-MESSAGE/34 URLs to other protocols .
.Sh AUTHORS
.Nm
has been written and documented by
.An sternenseemann ,
.Mt sterni-spacecookie@systemli.org .
.Sh SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
.Nm
supports no migitations or attack surface reduction measures other than
automatically switching to a less privileged user after binding.
It is recommended to use this feature and to make use of containering
or sandboxing like for example
.Xr systemd.exec 5
supports.
.Pp
TLS-enabled gopher, like the
.Ql gophers
protocol supported by
.Xr curl 1
is not natively supported by
.Nm
at this time.
