.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt SPACECOOKIE.JSON 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm spacecookie.json
.Nd configuration file for
.Xr spacecookie 1
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Xr spacecookie 1
config file is a JSON file which contains a single object.
The allowed fields representing individual settings and their effect are explained below.
.Ss REQUIRED SETTINGS
The following settings must be part of every configuration file as there
is no default or fallback value for them.
.Bl -tag -width 2n -offset 0n
.It Sy hostname
Describes the public server name
.Xr spacecookie 1
is reachable through, i. e. the address clients will use to connect to it.
It will be used to populate gopher menus with the correct server name, so
follow up requests from clients actually reach the correct server.
For testing purposes, it can be useful to set it to
.Ql localhost .
.Pp
Type: string.
.It Sy root
Sets the the directory
.Xr spacecookie 1
should serve via gopher.
All gopher requests will be resolved to files or directories under that root.
Files and directories will be served to users if no component of the resolved
path starts with a dot and they are readable for the user
.Xr spacecookie 1
is running as.
.Pp
Type: string.
.El
.Ss OPTIONAL SETTINGS
The following settings are optional, meaning there is either a default value
or an obvious default behavior if they are not given.
.Bl -tag -width 2n -offset 0n
.It Sy listen
Describes the address and port
.Xr spacecookie 1
should listen on.
Both aspects can be controlled individually by the two optional fields
described below.
.Pp
Type: object.
.Bl -tag -offset 0n -width 2n
.It Sy port
Port to listen on.
The well-known port for gopher is
.Ms 70 .
.Pp
If
.Xr systemd.socket 5
activation is used, this setting will have no effect on the actual
port the socket is bound to since this is done by
.Xr systemd 1 .
It will then only be used to display the server's port in gopher menus for
subsequent requests, so make sure whatever is set here matches what
.Xr systemd 1
is doing.
.Pp
Type: number.
Default:
.Ql 70 .
.It Sy addr
Address to listen and accept gopher requests on.
In contrast to
.Sy hostname ,
this option controls the socket setup and not what is used in gopher menus.
This option is especially useful to limit the addresses
.Xr spacecookie 1
will listen on since it listens on all available addresses
for incoming requests by default, i. e.
.Sy INADDR_ANY .
For example,
.Ql ::1
can be used to listen on the link-local addresses only
which comes in handy if you are setting up a onion service using
.Xr tor 1
and want to avoid leaking the server's identity.
.Pp
When given,
.Xr getaddrinfo 3
is used to resolve the given hostname or parse the given IP address and
.Xr spacecookie 1
will only listen on the resulting address(es).
Note that
.Sy IPV6_V6ONLY
is always disabled, so, if possible, both the resulting v4 and v6 address will be used.
.Pp
If
.Xr systemd.socket 5
activation is used, this setting has no effect.
.Pp
Type: string.
.El
.It Sy user
The name of the user spacecookie should run as.
When this option is given and not
.Ql null ,
.Xr spacecookie 1
will call
.Xr setuid 2
and
.Xr setgid 2
after setting up its socket to switch to that user and their primary group.
Note that this is only necessary to set if
.Xr spacecookie 1
is started with root privileges in the first place as the binary shouldn't have
the setuid bit set.
An alternative to starting the daemon as root, so it can bind its socket to a
well-known port, is to use
.Xr systemd 1
socket activation.
See the
.Xr spacecookie 1
man page for details on setting this up.
.Pp
Type: string.
Default:
.Ql null .
.It Sy log
Allows to customize the logging output of
.Xr spacecookie 1
to
.Sy stderr .
.Pp
Type: object.
.Bl -tag -offset 0n -width 2n
.It Sy enable
Wether to enable logging.
.Pp
Type: bool.
Default:
.Ql true .
.It Sy hide-ips
Wether to hide IP addresses of clients in the log output.
If enabled,
.Ql [redacted]
is displayed instead of client's IP addresses to avoid writing personal
information to disk.
.Pp
Type: bool.
Default:
.Ql true .
.It Sy hide-time
If this is set to
.Ql true ,
.Xr spacecookie 1
will not print timestamps at the beginning of every log line.
This is useful if you use an additional daemon or tool to take care of logs
which records timestamps automatically, like
.Xr systemd 1 .
.Pp
Type: bool.
Default:
.Ql false .
.It Sy level
Controls verbosity of logging.
It is recommended to either use
.Qq warn
or
.Qq info
since
.Qq error
hides warnings that are indicative of configuration issues.
.Pp
Type: either
.Qq error ,
.Qq warn
or
.Qq info .
Default:
.Qq info .
.El
.El
.Sh EXAMPLE
The following configuration equates to the default behavior of
.Xr spacecookie 1
for all optional settings, although it is much verboser than necessary.
.Bd -literal -offset Ds
{
  "hostname" : "localhost",
  "root" : "/srv/gopher",
  "listen" : {
    "addr" : "::",
    "port" : 70
  },
  "user" : null,
  "log" : {
    "enable" : true,
    "hide-ips" : true,
    "hide-time" : false,
    "level" : "info"
  }
}
.Ed
.Pp
This configuration is suitable for running as an onion service:
It disables logging completely to not collect any kind of meta data about users
and only listens on the link-local address to avoid leaking its identity.
We can also use a non-well-known port since
.Xr tor 1
allows free mapping from local to exposed ports, so
.Xr spacecookie 1
can be started as a normal user.
.Bd -literal -offset Ds
{
  "hostname": "myonionservicehash.onion",
  "root": "/srv/onion-gopher",
  "listen": {
    "addr": "::1",
    "port": 7070
  },
  "log": {
    "enable": false
  }
}
.Ed
.Pp
If you are not using socket activation for running a gopher server on the
well-known port for gopher, a config like this is apporpriate, provided the
user
.Ql gopher
exists:
.Bd -literal -offset Ds
{
  "hostname": "example.org",
  "root": "/srv/gopher",
  "user": "gopher"
}
.Ed
.Pp
For a
.Xr systemd.socket 5
based setup, the
.Ql user
field should be omitted and
.Xr spacecookie 1
started as the target user directly in the
.Xr systemd.service 5
file.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr spacecookie 1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
documentation has been written by
.An sternenseemann ,
.Mt sterni-spacecookie@systemli.org .
